{"question": "What are the roles and powers of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker in the Indian Parliament?", "answer": "The roles and powers of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker in the Indian Parliament include: 1. Presiding over the sessions of the House of the People. 2. Maintaining order and decorum within the House. 3. Deciding on matters of procedure and referring questions of privilege to the appropriate committee. 4. Ensuring that the rights and privileges of members are protected. 5. Referring Bills and other matters to the relevant committees for examination and report. 6. Casting a vote in case of a tie on any matter being voted upon in the House. 7. Representing the House in its relations with the President, the authorities, and other authorities outside the House. The Deputy Speaker performs the duties of the Speaker in his absence or when the office of the Speaker is vacant. They also perform any other duties assigned to them by the Speaker or the House."}

{"question": "What is the procedure for the removal of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker from office?", "answer": "The procedure for the removal of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker from office is laid down in Article 96 of the Indian Constitution. At any sitting of the House of the People, a resolution for the removal of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker can be considered. While the resolution is under consideration, the Speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be, shall not preside over the House, even if they are present. The provisions of Article 95(2) apply in relation to every such sitting, which deals with the appointment of an alternative person to act as Speaker during their absence. The Speaker has the right to participate in the proceedings of the House while the resolution for their removal is under consideration and is entitled to vote only in the first instance on such resolution or any other matter during the proceedings, but not in case of an equality of votes."}

{"question": "What are the salaries and allowances of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman, and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker?", "answer": "The salaries and allowances of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Council of States, and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of the People are determined by Parliament through legislation. Until such provisions are made, their salaries and allowances are specified in the Second Schedule of the Indian Constitution."}

{"question": "What is the role of the Secretariat of Parliament?", "answer": "The role of the Secretariat of Parliament, as per Article 98 of the Indian Constitution, is to provide administrative and procedural support to both Houses of Parliament. Each House has a separate secretarial staff, although some posts may be common to both Houses. The recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to the secretarial staff are regulated by Parliament through legislation. Until such provisions are made, the President may make rules regulating the recruitment and conditions of service for the secretarial staff after consultation with the Speaker of the House of the People or the Chairman of the Council of States, as the case may be."}

{"question": "What is the procedure for taking the oath or affirmation by members of Parliament?", "answer": "The procedure for taking the oath or affirmation by members of Parliament is outlined in Article 99 of the Indian Constitution. Every member of either House of Parliament must make and subscribe to an oath or affirmation before taking their seat. The oath or affirmation is made before the President or a person appointed by the President for this purpose, following the form set out in the Third Schedule of the Constitution."}

{"question": "What are the rules regarding voting, quorum, and vacancies in either House of Parliament?", "answer": "Article 100 of the Indian Constitution lays down the rules regarding voting, quorum, and vacancies in either House of Parliament. Decisions on all questions at any sitting of either House or joint sitting of the Houses are determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, excluding the Speaker or person acting as Chairman or Speaker. The Chairman or Speaker has a casting vote in case of an equality of votes. Either House of Parliament has the power to act notwithstanding any vacancy in its membership, and any proceedings in Parliament are valid even if it is later discovered that a person who was not entitled to do so participated in the proceedings. The quorum to constitute a meeting of either House of Parliament is one-tenth of the total number of members of the House, unless Parliament by law otherwise provides. If there is no quorum during a meeting of a House, it is the duty of the Chairman or Speaker, or person acting as such, to adjourn the House or suspend the meeting until there is a quorum."}

{"question": "What are the disqualifications for membership of either House of Parliament?", "answer": "Article 102 of the Indian Constitution lists the disqualifications for being chosen as, and for being, a member of either House of Parliament. A person is disqualified if they: (a) hold any office of profit under the Government of India or any State, other than an office declared by Parliament by law not to disqualify its holder; (b) are of unsound mind and declared so by a competent court; (c) are an undischarged insolvent; (d) are not a citizen of India, have voluntarily acquired the citizenship of a foreign State, or are under any acknowledgment of allegiance or adherence to a foreign State; (e) are disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament. Additionally, a person is disqualified for being a member of either House of Parliament if they are disqualified under the Tenth Schedule of the Constitution."}

{"question": "How are decisions made on questions related to disqualifications of members of Parliament?", "answer": "As per Article 103 of the Indian Constitution, if a question arises regarding whether a member of either House of Parliament has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in Article 102, the question is referred to the President for decision, and the President's decision is final. Before giving any decision on such a question, the President must obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and act according to that opinion."}

{"question": "What are the penalties for sitting and voting before taking the oath or affirmation, or when not qualified or disqualified?", "answer": "Article 104 of the Indian Constitution outlines the penalties for sitting and voting as a member of either House of Parliament before complying with the requirements of Article 99 (taking the oath or affirmation), or when knowing that they are not qualified or disqualified for membership, or when prohibited from doing so by any law made by Parliament. In such cases, the person is liable to a penalty of five hundred rupees for each day they sit or vote, to be recovered as a debt due to the Union."}

{"question": "What are the powers, privileges, and immunities of Parliament and its members?", "answer": "Article 105 of the Indian Constitution outlines the powers, privileges, and immunities of Parliament and its members. Subject to the Constitution's provisions and the rules and standing orders regulating Parliament's procedure, there is freedom of speech in Parliament. No member of Parliament is liable to any proceedings in any court regarding anything said or any vote given by them in Parliament or any committee thereof. No person is liable for the publication of any report, paper, votes, or proceedings authorized by either House of Parliament. The powers, privileges, and immunities of each House of Parliament, and of the members and committees of each House, are defined by Parliament through law, and until defined, they remain as they were before the coming into force of the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978. The provisions of Article 105 also apply to persons who have the right to speak in and participate in the proceedings of a House of Parliament or any committee thereof."}

{"question": "What are the salaries and allowances of members of Parliament?", "answer": "Article 106 of the Indian Constitution states that members of either House of Parliament are entitled to receive salaries and allowances determined by Parliament through legislation. Until such provisions are made, members receive allowances at rates and conditions that were applicable to members of the Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India before the Constitution's commencement."}

{"question": "What are the provisions for introducing and passing Bills in Parliament?", "answer": "Article 107 of the Indian Constitution lays down the provisions for introducing and passing Bills in Parliament. Subject to the provisions of Articles 109 and 117 for Money Bills and other financial Bills, a Bill may originate in either House of Parliament. A Bill is not deemed to have been passed by both Houses unless it has been agreed to by both Houses, either without amendment or with amendments agreed to by both Houses. A Bill pending in Parliament does not lapse due to the prorogation of the Houses. A Bill pending in the Council of States that has not been passed by the House of the People does not lapse on the dissolution of the House of the People. A Bill pending in the House of the People or having been passed by the House of the People and pending in the Council of States, subject to Article 108, lapses on the dissolution of the House of the People."}

{"question": "What is the procedure for joint sitting of both Houses of Parliament in certain cases?", "answer": "Article 108 of the Indian Constitution outlines the procedure for joint sitting of both Houses of Parliament in certain cases. If a Bill has been passed by one House and transmitted to the other House, and the Bill is rejected, the Houses have finally disagreed on amendments, or more than six months elapse without the Bill being passed by the other House, the President may summon the Houses to meet in a joint sitting for deliberating and voting on the Bill, unless it has lapsed due to the dissolution of the House of the People. If a Bill is passed at the joint sitting with agreed amendments, it is deemed to have been passed by both Houses. Joint sittings can be held and Bills passed even if the House of the People has been dissolved since the President notified his intention to summon the Houses to meet in a joint sitting."}

{"question": "What is the special procedure in respect of Money Bills in the Indian Parliament?", "answer": "Article 109 of the Indian Constitution outlines the special procedure in respect of Money Bills. A Money Bill cannot be introduced in the Council of States. After a Money Bill has been passed by the House of the People, it is transmitted to the Council of States for its recommendations. The Council of States must return the Bill to the House of the People with its recommendations within 14 days from the date of receipt. The House of the People may accept or reject the recommendations of the Council of States. If the House of the People accepts the Council's recommendations, the Money Bill is deemed to have been passed by both Houses with the recommended amendments. If the House of the People does not accept the recommendations, the Money Bill is deemed to have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it was passed by the House of the People. If the Council of States does not return the Money Bill within 14 days, it is deemed to have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it was passed by the House of the People."}

{"question": "What is the definition of 'Money Bills' in the Indian Constitution?", "answer": "Article 110 of the Indian Constitution defines 'Money Bills' for the purposes of the chapter on legislative procedures. A Bill is deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with: (a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration, or regulation of any tax; (b) the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any guarantee by the Government of India, or the amendment of the law with respect to any financial obligations undertaken by the Government of India; (c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund of India, the payment of moneys into or the withdrawal of moneys from any such Fund; (d) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India; (e) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India or the increasing of the amount of any such expenditure; (f) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of India or the public account of India or the custody or issue of such money, or the audit of the accounts of the Union or of a State; or (g) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in the above categories."}