{"question": "What is Article 290 in the Indian Constitution?", "answer": "Article 290 in the Indian Constitution deals with the adjustment in respect of certain expenses and pensions. It outlines the circumstances when expenses of any court or commission, or the pension payable to a person who has served under the Crown in India or after the commencement of the Constitution, are charged on the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of a State. It further specifies the contributions to be charged and paid out of the Consolidated Funds in case of serving the separate needs of a State or the Union, or if the person has served in connection with the affairs of a State, the Union, or another State."}

{"question": "What is the purpose of Article 292 in the Indian Constitution?", "answer": "Article 292 in the Indian Constitution grants the executive power of the Union to borrow money upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of India. The borrowing can be done within limits set by Parliament through legislation, and the Union can also provide guarantees within the specified limits. This article helps the Government of India to raise funds when necessary for various purposes, such as infrastructure development, social welfare programs or addressing emergencies."}

{"question": "What does Article 293 of the Indian Constitution state?", "answer": "Article 293 of the Indian Constitution deals with borrowing by States. It allows the executive power of a State to borrow money within the territory of India upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of the State, within limits set by the state legislature. The article also allows the Government of India to make loans to any State or give guarantees in respect of loans raised by any State, subject to conditions laid down by Parliament. However, a State cannot raise a loan without the consent of the Government of India if there is still an outstanding loan made by the Government of India or its predecessor, or if a guarantee has been given by the Government of India or its predecessor."}

{"question": "What is the significance of Article 294 in the Indian Constitution?", "answer": "Article 294 of the Indian Constitution deals with the succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities, and obligations in certain cases. It states that, as from the commencement of the Constitution, all property and assets vested in His Majesty for the purposes of the Government of the Dominion of India and each Governor’s Province shall vest respectively in the Union and the corresponding State. It also states that all rights, liabilities, and obligations of the Government of the Dominion of India and of each Governor's Province shall be the rights, liabilities, and obligations respectively of the Government of India and the Government of each corresponding State. This article ensures a smooth transfer of assets and liabilities from the previous government structures to the newly established Union and State governments under the Constitution."}

{"question": "What does Article 295 of the Indian Constitution entail?", "answer": "Article 295 of the Indian Constitution deals with the succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities, and obligations in other cases. It specifies that from the commencement of the Constitution, all property and assets vested in any Indian State corresponding to a State specified in Part B of the First Schedule shall vest in the Union if the purposes for which they were held before the commencement will be purposes of the Union relating to matters enumerated in the Union List. It also states that all rights, liabilities, and obligations of the Government of any Indian State corresponding to a State specified in Part B of the First Schedule shall be the rights, liabilities, and obligations of the Government of India if the purposes for which they were acquired or incurred before the commencement will be purposes of the Government of India relating to matters enumerated in the Union List. This article ensures the proper allocation of property, assets, rights, liabilities, and obligations in cases involving the transition of Indian States into the new constitutional framework."}

{"question": "What is the purpose of Article 296 in the Indian Constitution?", "answer": "Article 296 of the Indian Constitution deals with property accruing by escheat, lapse, or as bona vacantia (property without a rightful owner) within the territory of India. It states that such property, if situated in a State, shall vest in that State, and if situated in any other case, shall vest in the Union. The article also provides a clarification that any property in possession or under control of the Government of India or the Government of a State at the date when it would have accrued to His Majesty or the Ruler of an Indian State shall vest in the Union or in that State, depending on the purposes for which it was then used or held. This article ensures proper allocation of ownerless property in the territory of India."}

{"question": "What does Article 297 of the Indian Constitution state?", "answer": "Article 297 of the Indian Constitution deals with things of value within territorial waters or continental shelf and resources of the exclusive economic zone. It states that all lands, minerals, and other things of value underlying the ocean within the territorial waters, continental shelf, or exclusive economic zone of India shall vest in the Union and be held for the purposes of the Union. It also states that all other resources of the exclusive economic zone of India shall vest in the Union and be held for its purposes. The article further specifies that the limits of the territorial waters, continental shelf, exclusive economic zone, and other maritime zones of India shall be determined by or under any law made by Parliament. This article ensures that valuable resources within India's maritime boundaries are under the control of the Union government."}

{"question": "What is Article 298 in the Indian Constitution?", "answer": "Article 298 of the Indian Constitution grants the executive power of the Union and each State to carry on any trade or business, acquire, hold and dispose of property, and make contracts for any purpose. This power is subject to certain limitations: the executive power of the Union shall be subject to legislation by the State in cases where the trade, business, or purpose is not within the purview of Parliament, and the executive power of each State shall be subject to legislation by Parliament in cases where the trade, business, or purpose is not within the purview of the State Legislature. This article ensures that both the Union and State governments can engage in trade, business, and other activities, within their respective jurisdictions and subject to the appropriate legislative authority."}

{"question": "What are the provisions of Article 299 in the Indian Constitution?", "answer": "Article 299 of the Indian Constitution governs contracts made in the exercise of the executive power of the Union or a State. It states that all such contracts must be expressed to be made by the President or the Governor of the State, as the case may be, and must be executed on their behalf by persons and in a manner directed or authorized by them. The article also provides that neither the President nor the Governor shall be personally liable in respect of any contract or assurance made or executed for the purposes of the Constitution or any enactment relating to the Government of India. Additionally, any person making or executing such a contract or assurance on behalf of the President or the Governor shall not be personally liable in respect thereof. This article ensures that contracts made by the government are properly executed and that the President and Governor, as well as those acting on their behalf, are not personally liable for such contracts."}

{"question": "What is the purpose of Article 300 in the Indian Constitution?", "answer": "Article 300 of the Indian Constitution deals with suits and proceedings involving the Government of India and the Government of a State. It states that the Government of India may sue or be sued by the name of the Union of India, and the Government of a State may sue or be sued by the name of the State. Both governments may sue or be sued in relation to their respective affairs in similar cases as the Dominion of India and the corresponding Provinces or the corresponding Indian States might have sued or been sued if the Constitution had not been enacted. The article also provides for the substitution of the Union of India for the Dominion of India and the corresponding State for the Province or the Indian State in legal proceedings pending at the commencement of the Constitution. This article ensures that the government entities can be held accountable and can participate in legal proceedings in the courts of law."}

{"question": "What does Article 300A of the Indian Constitution state?", "answer": "Article 300A of the Indian Constitution states that no person shall be deprived of his property save by the authority of law. This article ensures that the right to property is protected and that an individual's property can only be taken away or interfered with in accordance with established legal procedures and principles. It emphasizes the importance of due process and the rule of law in matters relating to property rights."}