{"question": "What are the three lists mentioned in the Constitution of India that determine the distribution of legislative powers between the Union and the States?", "answer": "The three lists mentioned in the Constitution of India that determine the distribution of legislative powers between the Union and the States are the Union List (List I), the State List (List II), and the Concurrent List (List III). These lists are enumerated in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. The Union List contains subjects on which only Parliament has the exclusive power to legislate. The State List consists of subjects on which the Legislature of a State has exclusive power to make laws. The Concurrent List includes subjects on which both Parliament and the State Legislatures have the power to legislate."}

{"question": "What is the process for Parliament to legislate on a matter in the State List in the national interest?", "answer": "For Parliament to legislate on a matter in the State List in the national interest, the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) must pass a resolution, supported by not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting, declaring that it is necessary or expedient in the national interest that Parliament should make laws with respect to the specified matter. Once the resolution is passed, it is lawful for Parliament to make laws for the whole or any part of India with respect to that matter while the resolution remains in force. The resolution remains in force for a period not exceeding one year, but it can be extended by passing another resolution in the same manner (Article 249)."}

{"question": "What happens if there is inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made by the Legislatures of States?", "answer": "If there is inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made by the Legislatures of States, the law made by Parliament prevails. The law made by the State Legislature becomes inoperative to the extent of the repugnancy, but only as long as the law made by Parliament continues to have effect (Article 251). If the State law has been reserved for the consideration of the President and has received his assent, it will prevail in that State (Article 254). However, Parliament can still enact a new law with respect to the same matter, and the new law will prevail over the State law."}

{"question": "Can Parliament make laws for implementing international agreements?", "answer": "Yes, Parliament has the power to make laws for the whole or any part of the territory of India for implementing any treaty, agreement, or convention with any other country or countries, or any decision made at any international conference, association, or other body (Article 253). This power is notwithstanding any of the other provisions of the Constitution related to legislative relations between the Union and the States."}

{"question": "What is the obligation of States and the Union regarding the compliance with laws made by Parliament?", "answer": "The executive power of every State is obligated to be exercised in a manner that ensures compliance with the laws made by Parliament and any existing laws that apply in that State. The executive power of the Union extends to giving directions to a State as may appear to the Government of India to be necessary for ensuring compliance with the laws made by Parliament (Article 256)."}